## Digger Wolfe 

<div class="info-box">

**What is a "Digger"?**

"Digger" is an Australian and New Zealand military slang term for a soldier, particularly one who served in World War I. The term originated during the Gallipoli campaign (1915-1916), where Australian and New Zealand soldiers spent much of their time digging trenches. It became a term of endearment and respect, symbolizing the courage, mateship, and resilience of ANZAC (Australian and New Zealand Army Corps) soldiers. The term is still used today as a mark of respect for Australian and New Zealand veterans.

</div>

Wolfe was born 1.11.1891 in Khoshchevato in Podolia. He left Russia together with his uncle [Moishe](/profiles/Moshe-%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%94-Hoffman-Hochman). According to his testimony his Russian passport was retained by the Turkish authorities in Palestine, and he was issued with a Turkish travelling passport.

He sailed from Port Said on the GMS Scharnhorst to Fremantle, arriving on 25.4.1910.

In 1912 he stated that he was employed as a labourer. In 1913 he was millhand at Hoffman Mill, where he lived (27 km NE of Harvey). On 25.2.1914 he was a millhand at Jarrahdale Mill. He would have bunked in the workers' quarters. When in Perth he lived at 426 William St., on the corner of Robinson Ave, with his uncle [Moshe](/profiles/Moshe-%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%94-Hoffman-Hochman).

He also notes that in 25.2.14 his aunt ([Sarah](/profiles/Sara-Hochman-Bershada), widow of [Haym Yehuda Hoffman](/profiles/Haim-Yehuda-%D7%97%D7%99%D7%99%D7%9D-%D7%99%D7%94%D7%95%D7%93%D7%94-Hochman)) and cousin ([Miss Shulamis Hoffman](/profiles/Shulamit-Hochman)) lived at the wine shop at 411 William St.,

---

### Naturalization

1.7.1912 he applied for naturalization, and took the oath before Augustus Sanford Roe. However the secretary for External Affairs, Atlee Arthur Hunt did not recognise the naturalization and wrote to him to reapply when he would be a 21 year-old.

17.11.1913 Wolfe reapplied and was duly naturalized.

---

### World War I Service

10.3.1915 Attestation. Signed to serve "for the duration of the war plus 4 months". Private Wolfe Hoffman 2224. His next of kin was his father, [Joseph](/profiles/Josef-Hochman), in Khoshchevato.

20.3.1915 Enlisted in the AIF (Australian Imperial Force). Basic training at Blackboy Hill Training Camp near Perth. Medical examination by M.O. Cap't W.C.Watch, Wolfe was 22yrs 4 mths, height 5'5", weight 147 lbs., and in good health.

Lt. Col. Charles Battye, was commandant of Blackboy Camp. He was a brother of [James Sykes Battye](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Sykes_Battye), librarian of the Victoria Public Library in Perth.

Wolfe was assigned to the 6th reinforcements of the 16th Battalion. The 16th Battalion had gone ashore at Gallipoli on the first day, 25th April. Among its officers was [Capt. Eliezer Margolin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_Margolin), commander of B Company.

Wolfe sailed to Fremantle on the HMAT BORDA and 25.6.1915 Wolfe embarked at Fremantle on the HMAT A62 Wandilla. Disembarked at Port Suez.

30.7.1915 "taken on strength Gallipoli".

---

### Gallipoli

Wolfe arrived at Gallipoli "in time for" the Battle of Sari Bair 6-8 August 1915.

The Fourth Brigade, comprised of the 13th, 14th, 15th and 16th Battalions, commanded by [Colonel John Monash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Monash) was the main British force in this operation. The left hook intended to occupy the ridge above Anzac failed; heavy Australian casualties due to enemy gunfire were compounded by men falling due to exhaustion, and exposure to the August heat.

[Roland Perry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roland_Perry) in Monash, the Outsider Who Won a War (Random House 2004). writes on the situation on the morning of the 7th of August, after a long night's march and battle:

<div class="citation-box">

At first light, Monash checked the battle area and conferred with the 16th's commander, Col. James Cannan and the 16th's Pope. They had incurred 300 casualties. "I counted 500 Turkish dead and wounded," Monash said in his war letters. "We made over 600 prisoners, including many officers. [We also captured] stores, rifle and gun ammunition, immense quantities of equipment, several fine chargers, telephone and camp equipment."

This was spin for posterity. The men of the 15th and 16th had just about collapsed on their feet. Monash ordered his commanders to dig in and rest. The commanders reported by phone (cut in an attack and restored) that they didn't have the energy for it. Not even another shot of rum, which had bucked them up earlier, would help.

As these horrific mishaps were unfolding, the 4th's 15th's and 16th's battalions dug in all through a very hot day. It was a miserable exercise for the men, who on occasion had to lie flat to dig. The snipers were even more active now that they could see their targets. Some in the 4th even ventured the wish to be back in the stink and heat of Reserve Gully.

For those testing days, the 4th was behaving as if it were back at the head of Monash Valley holding the line. They were depleted, without water, good ammunition supplies or adequate provisions. They were resting without covering and were in need of a complete break. Bronchitis was beginning to run through the battalions as fast as dysentery.

</div>

Gallipoli wasn't over for the battered remnants of the 4th Brigade which was down from 3350 to 1400 men.

Wolfe's records do not tell where he was during that week on Gallipoli, but as an ordinary digger he must have participated in that battle. A hospital discharge record from Cairo later in 1915 notes that Wolfe was a member of B company 16th Btt'n.

On Gallipoli, Wolfe's company commander would have been [Capt. Eliezer Margolin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_Margolin) and his regimental commander [Colonel John Monash](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Monash). To have served under the two most distinguished Jewish officers of the AIF was remarkable.

Wolfe was evacuated sick from Gallipoli and the diagnoses were debility and exhaustion. In my opinion he likely suffered from dysentery and/or dehydration, and perhaps heat stroke during the Sari Bair offense.

---

### Medical Treatment and Recovery

His personal file tersely records:

11.8.1915 hospitalized.  
16.8.1915 admitted to the 1st Australian Base Hospital in Cairo, from HS Neuralia.  
Hospitalized for 11 days and treated for treated for "exhaustion", and for "debility".  
21.8.1915 transferred to ? Due to "debility" in Cairo.  
26.8.1915 transferred from A&NZ Convalescent Hospital at Helouan.... for exhaustion. to light duties at Zeitoun.  
20.10.1915 no2. Australian Convalescent depot at Heliopolis for gastritis.  
6.11.1915 - 21.11.1915 hospitalized at Heliopolis for "injury to face and neck".

(In 1942 when Wolfe was discharged from the CMF, the medical officer who examined him documented "scar upper lip").

---

### Military Police Service

31.5.1916 Transferred to Police HQ Tel el Kebir. Anzac Provost Corps.  
19.7.1916 transferred to military police. (Anzac Provost Corps).

He served in a unit called Security Intelligence, Egypt.

Wolfe's son [Hymie](/profiles/Haim-Yehuda-Hoffman) told me that Wolfe and his mate Lion Harlap were sent to search for German spies in Cairo. There were no spies, but the two got up to all sorts of escapades there.

---

### Service in France

2.8.1916 Assigned to the BEF (the term "British Imperial Force" is now limited to the army serving in Belgium and in France in 1914 and 1915). Embarked on HT Franconia from Alexandria for England.

Wolfe was then back in the 16th Battalion.

6.3.1917 Was at Codford in the 16th Battalion ex. 4Th Training Battalion.

10.3.1917 Major Wynam sent him to 96 hours detention for insolence to an officer.

25.6.1917 Transferred to 17th Field Ambulance AAMC at Windmill Hill, Andover, in Hampshire. This unit was being formed as part of a proposed Sixth Division. However, due to the high rate of attrition due to battle and disability in the existing five divisions, the Sixth Division was not realized. Better known is Windmill Hill (or Ridge) near Pozieres on the Somme. Mills were built on hills, so there must be more so-named places.

21.9.1917 Transferred from Windmill Hill to Parkhouse Depot, in Hampshire. To the AMCTW = Australian Medical Corps Training??

25.10.1917 17th FA disbanded. The men were sent to existing medical units. Wolfe was sent to Parkhouse Depot.

17.11.1917 From Parkhouse sent to France via Southampton.  
18.11.1917 Arrived at Rouelles, a major AAMC depot near Rouen.  
28.11.1917 Marched out to 3rd Division Australian Medical Corps.

---

### In the Field

from 3.12.1917 "in the Field" with the 11th Field Ambulance of the 3rd Division.

Wolfe's period of service in the trenches on the Somme lasted until 8.7.1918.

10.3.1918 "while on active service did absent himself from duty" Admonished by commanding officer.

11-13.4.1918 In sick bay for tracheitis.

We know that Wolfe, as a Repat patient, suffered from pulmonary disease as a result of a gassing at the front. This hospitalization, most likely, was that episode.

On his discharge he was transferred to another Field Ambulance, but attached to the same 3rd Division.

17.4.1918 Transferred from the 11th FA to 9th FA. In the field with the 9th FA.

The soldiers' records available from the Australian National Archives record particular events - among them attachments and transfers between units, disciplinary matters, illness and injury. A soldier is with his unit unless otherwise noted. It follows that Wolfe participated in all those operations in which the Brigade took part, and which the Field Ambulance would have mobilized ever man to support. He would have been exposed to shelling and gas as at least as much as any digger in the infantry.

<div class="info-box">

**Comment:** The fighting around Passchendaele (until 22.10.1917) proved to be the 3rd Division's last offensive actions for 1917 and they spent the winter months in the rear training, or undertaking defensive duties in reasonably quiet sectors of the line as they were reformed and brought back up to strength. Around this time also, the five Australian divisions on the Western Front were reorganised into a unified command structure under the Australian Corps.

In March 1918 the Germans launched their Spring Offensive near Saint Quentin and as the Allied line collapsed, the German forces advanced swiftly into the Somme Valley. Believing that another attack would be directed against the forces in the Flanders sector, in an effort to reinforce the British forces there, the Allied commanders recalled the 3rd Division was recalled from its quiet sector around Armentieres and sent it to Ypres. The attack came, however, at the Somme and so on 24 March the division was transferred south to help stem the advance and defend the approaches towards the important railhead at Amiens.

</div>

The battle honours of the battalions of the 9th and of the 10th Brigades include: the Somme 21.3.1918 – 3.9.1918, and Ancre 5.4.1918.

The battle honours of the battalions of the 11th Brigade include: the Somme 21.3.1918 – 3.9.1918, Ancre 5.4.1918, and Hamel 4.7.1918.

An informal history of the 11th Field Ambulance which appeared in 1919 has been reprinted. Though worth reading, there is nothing in it specific to Wolfe's army service, however, the following excerpt tells of the dangers and exertions of the stretcher bearers.

<div class="citation-box">

During it's time on the Western Front the Ambulance was involved in numerous areas and sectors including, Ploegsteert, Messines (No carry was under two miles over ground shell-churned and trackless.), Charing Cross (in this area doctors and personnel were also compelled to work with gas marks on.), Ypres (Broodseine Ridge, Passchendaele and Flanders Ridge), the Somme and Villers Bretonneux. The casualties were numerous, and the bearers had a very strenuous task evacuating them from the various posts. During these offensives the Commanding Officer, LTCOL Chambers, (26 Oct 1917 – 15 Sep 1918) was awarded a DSO for his close attention to detail, and his fearlessness in the presence of danger.

In the final stages of the war the Ambulance was involved in the last Somme operations in 1918. The then Commanding officer LTCOL Lewers (13 Sep 1918 – 11 May 1919) was received the award of the "Order of the British Empire" (OBE) for the following reasons. "During the attack on the Hindenburg Line, 29 September, 1918/1 October, 1918, Colonel Lewers was able to effect the prompt evacuation of an unexpectedly large number of American casualties in addition to those of his Division by the exercise of his untiring energy and power of initiative."

From the time of its first casualty in April 1917 to the cessation of hostilities the unit experienced 19 killed in action, 56 wounded in action. As well as 41 men were gassed of which one subsequently died, so for a period of just under two years active service the unit had 116 casualties.

</div>

The stretcher bearers who has to carry wounded diggers more than two miles through muddy trenches, and over shell-churned ground under shellfire and gas attack must have been extremely fit. The compulsion to work wearing gas masks further burdened their respiratory effort (dead space and resistance). They were employed and exposed in every action.

---

### Return to Australia

8.7.1918 While in the field, Wolfe was admitted to hospital sick.  
9.8.1918 Invalided to UK, sick with dysentery.  
10.8.1918 Admitted to hospital, Reading, for dysentery.

Wolfe was subsequently hospitalized at the 1st AA Hospital at Harefield, and at the No. 2 Convalescent Depot at Weymouth.

4.12.1918 Embarked on HT Somerset, from Weymouth, Dorset.  
8.1.1919 Disembarked. Was this at Fremantle?  
11.4.1919 Discharged. Or 13.4.1919. Abroad 3 years and 214 days. 3 years and 240 days abroad.

---

### Medals and Honors

Wolfe was entitled to wear three service medals, with ribbons:
- 1914-1915 Star
- Victory Medal
- British War Medal

He also received two badges:
- Anzac medal
- Silver medal

Every Anzac soldier who served on the Gallipoli Peninsula, or in direct support of operations there - or his family if he did not survive until into the late 1960s - was entitled to be issued with the Anzac Commemorative Medallion.

The Silver War Badge was a First World War badge authorised for issue to members of the armed forces of the British empire. It was granted to those who had served since 4 August 1914. In the case of officers the badge was issued to those who had retired or relinquished their commissions. The badge was issued to other ranks who had been discharged on account of age, wounds or sickness, such as would render them permanently unfit for further service.

**Suggested reading**: "Russian Anzacs" by Elena Govor.

---

### Post-War Life

26.1.1920 Marries [Selamis Hoffman](/profiles/Shulamit-Hochman).

1933 Melbourne.  
1940 Melbourne.

---

### World War II Service

6.4.1942 Wolfe enlisted in the Australian Military Forces. His service number was V148000.

At his medical examination he was classified as "Fit for Class III". His address was 54 Kooyong Rd., Caulfield. He was then a manufacturer and distributor of ladies blouses. Hoffman's Blouses, 601 Elizabeth St, Melbourne.

**Army Medical Classifications—World War II**

Up to 7th August 1942, the medical classification of recruits was as follows:
- **Class 1** Fit for active service with field formations.
- **Class IIA** Fit for specified duties in any unit in which the particular disability was no bar.
- **Class IIB** Fit for any duty other than with field formations.
- **Class III** Labour Units, CMF, Temporarily Unfit; Unfit.

Soldiers volunteered for the AIF could be sent overseas, however members of the CMF could and were sent to New Guinea because it was an Australian territory.

Wolfe's army records note that he served in the Attestation Office in Caulfield.

15.10.1942 Wolfe was discharged from the Army. Reason for discharge: Class VI Unfit.

His service was summarized as: total period of service towards completion of engagement 193 days, including service abroad of 185 days.

<div class="info-box">

**Comment:** This note is inexplicable. Wolfe did not serve abroad in WW2.

</div>

Wolfe died on 2.5.1976 in Sydney.

