## SCHOENBRUNN

### This chapter was taken from the book "Without Regret" by Edith's sister in law [Louise Hoffman](/profiles/Louise-Hoffman-Cohen):

[Edith Hoffman](/profiles/Edith-%D7%A6%D7%99%D7%A8%D7%9C-Hoffman-Spielmann) (née Spielman) was born in Vienna at the end of World War I. She was the youngest of four children. She grew up in a conventional Viennese household where her family lived modestly in a flat near the Westbahnhof. Politics were part of life in Vienna as well as visiting art galleries, museums, theatre, opera and walking in the Vienna Woods. When the Anschluss occurred that life was shattered. Edith left for Melbourne, Australia, by lucky circumstance in September 1938. She travelled per the Lloyd Triestino vessel SS Viminale later sunk during the war. She had never seen the sea before. She married a West Australian in 1942 and is the mother of two sons and a daughter and has six grandchildren.

There were four children in my family and I was the youngest by ten years, my parents being quite old, perhaps in their early forties, when I was born. By that time my parents were living in somewhat different circumstances from their situation before World War I. We lived on the first floor in a flat within a block of thirty apartments. At times we had live-in help. My mother did all the cooking, she never went out to work.

My father was quite civic minded and also did unpaid social work in the district. For example, if anyone in the district required coupons for coal he would investigate if help was needed and fill in the necessary forms. As a member of the Social Democratic Party he was active in our district.

It was not a Jewish area and there were only two Jewish families in the building. The main Jewish district of Vienna then was the 2nd District, the Leopoldstadt. We seldom went there, but I remember seeing people in orthodox dress, kaftans and broad black hats.

There was a synagogue not far from our home. I didn't go often because we used to go to school on Saturdays. Father knew a lot about the Jewish religion and he sometimes went to the synagogue on a Friday night. My father was born in Nickolsburg, Austro-Hungary. After World War I they were given the choice of Czechoslovakian or Austrian citizenship following the Treaty of Versailles. My father then opted for Austria and became an Austrian citizen.

Mother was born in a part of Austria near the border of Hungary. She grew up with a very orthodox aunty as her mother had died in childbirth. She came from a large family as did my father who was one of a family of twelve. I knew them all, over sixty cousins. I remember Seder nights in our home where my father conducted the services.

On Sundays, often we used to go on family visits in the countryside. I went to a state primary school. There were only two other Jewish girls there and naturally we became friends. I was a good student and always got top marks. We used to do Bible study in the afternoon and for this we had to go to a different school. We were collected from our area and taken there. I did very well in an entrance exam and got into a very good gymnasium on a scholarship at the age of ten or eleven. I stayed at that school for eight years. I was a serious student and worked very hard. I was ambitious and passed my Leaving with distinction.

However, I did not learn anything practical at school and this later proved to be a problem. I learnt Latin, solid geometry, science and maths. The only good thing I did study was English, which in a sense saved my life, proving useful for emigration. The school I went to was a very good girls' school, not co-educational. It was a wealthy school and the daughters of many prominent Viennese people attended. There were many Jewish girls and a rabbi came twice a week to conduct classes in Jewish studies. I remember him well. He had three academic degrees and later went on to South Africa. Of the twenty girls in our leaving class, sixteen were Jewish. The curriculum was under the control of the Education Ministry. There were both written and oral examinations, the latter being conducted by someone from the Education Department.

I didn't experience anti-semitism personally, but I knew I was Jewish and somehow the Jewish students stuck together. I knew from history that anti-semitism was always around.

I was aware of the existence of the Nazi Party particularly in the country. Vienna was a very political city. I remember the demonstrations and much firing and shooting in the streets from when I was fifteen years old. There were many of these small riots mainly involving Catholics against the Workers Party. The Socialist Party was very strong and did a great deal to help the workers. There were fantastic buildings for workers considered an example to Europe. Politics, elections and demonstrations were part of life as both my father and brother were both heavily involved in that life. People had flags in their windows and wore party emblems on their lapels. Most Jewish people, even the wealthy Jews, belonged to the Social Democratic Party. The opposition was the Christian Democratic party whose members were mainly rural Catholics.

Then the Anschluss took place. I was eighteen years old. As the Germans marched into Austria I watched from behind a window in the apartment on the Ringstrasse. It was the home of a wealthy friend whose family lived opposite the Opera House on the Ring. We were hidden behind curtains and were careful not to be seen. We were too afraid someone would see Jewish faces and come and take us. I will never forget the terror, the sight that Hitler's march created for us and the way the Austrians were jubilant and cheering.

From one day to another everything changed. In our building I had always been friendly with the boys and girls. The next day they turned away, they didn't want to know us. They were too afraid to be seen to have anything to do with Jews. These were people I had known all my life. They didn't turn on us in the building. Mother had always been popular there, always helping others if she could. There were just my parents, my sister Katie, and myself. My brothers had already left home and had places of their own. It was terribly scary. It's a feeling you can never forget.

Getting out of Austria and coming to Australia was a stroke of luck, the result of a contact with some visiting Australians and my being able to speak English. It was in 1937. My cousin Kurt was already in Melbourne. A Jewish family from there who were friends of his came to stay with his parents while they were in Vienna. They were on a world tour. I was asked by my aunt and uncle to come to their place where I interpreted for them. That was my contact – English. To get a letter from them asking me if I would like to come to Australia just a week after Hitler came was like a miracle. Jewish people were trying madly to get out of Austria and it wasn't easy. My father did not hesitate for one moment and said that I should go. I wrote back to the Melbourne family accepting their sponsorship.

In the meantime while waiting for permission to emigrate from Vienna I decided to do a certified diploma course for teaching English. The school was on the Ringstrasse and to get there I had to take two trams. I went out with my hat down and coat collar up, in order not to be recognised as being Jewish.

My sister Katie was rounded up twice and forced to scrub footpaths. The police came looking for my brother but he was hiding elsewhere. Both my sister and brother escaped Vienna by travelling to the Swiss border by train. From there they crossed the mountains on skis. They were arrested by the Swiss authorities and put into camps. My brother was there through the entire war. I managed to get a permit for my sister and she came to Australia.

My other brother was able to get a work-permit for England and from there he migrated to Sydney. He managed to bring my parents to England in March 1939 where my father died soon after as the result of a stroke. My mother stayed in England where she lived in a Jewish boarding house in Golders Green. She came to Australia on the same ship as Rabbi Porush, the last ship through the Suez Canal before Italy entered the war. My future father-in-law [Moshe](/profiles/Moshe-%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%94-Hoffman-Hochman) met her at Fremantle and looked after her for the day while the ship was in port.

Some of my aunts, uncles and their families perished in the concentration camps. One of my cousins, Ilse, to whom I have always been very close, lost her mother and sister in Auschwitz and her father was interned in Dachau. She was sent on one of the children's transports to England where she lived with a non-Jewish family.

It took another six months to get the necessary papers, passport and police certificate. I finally received the permit papers and left on the night of the Munich Agreement, 30 September 1938. I will never forget that. I went by train with my aunt and uncle, cousin Kurt's parents, to Genoa where we had to wait a few days for the ship to sail. I was sad. I didn't want to leave Europe before having seen Italy.

The voyage to Australia was exciting. The boat journey was an adventure. We travelled from Genoa on the Lloyd Triestino liner the SS Viminale via Livorno, Messina, Port Said, Colombo, Fremantle and Melbourne. I had never seen the sea before and I couldn't imagine what the sea would look like, I was used to the mountains. At first I was scared stiff. But I was young and I had a lovely time. Only one thing really worried me, I had no profession, only a good education, a certificate to teach English and a short course in typing. I didn't know what I would do.

I was met on my arrival in Melbourne by the family who had guaranteed me as an immigrant. I stayed in their house and shared a room with their sixteen-year-old daughter. My sponsor was well known in business and he secured a job for me with a company manufacturing radios in South Melbourne. It involved typing technical details which I found impossible as my typing was not good enough. The job lasted one week. Then I got into Lloyds of London Insurance Company. The girls I worked with were helpful and I copied the way they managed their typewriters. The manager was an Englishman who was very sympathetic to someone who had gone through the Hitler ordeal. He asked many questions and was very interested in what was happening in Europe. My knowledge of maths was a great help in this job particularly for the statistics.

I learnt about codes and decoding in the office. There were different rates from London each day for marine insurance. My knowledge of geography came in handy as I knew all the places that were mentioned. My English was very good, I could write correctly, without a dictionary, but I had great difficulty on the telephone. I couldn't get the names right. They would laugh at me in the office over that. In the evenings I gave English lessons to elderly German refugees.

I was not terribly happy in Melbourne. I had lost all my close friends. The city in those days was quiet and dull. The home life I had was quite restrictive. In those days you did not dare to speak German in public or be recognised as a refugee. I had promised a friend who was a milliner to help her get out of Austria. When I saw an advertisement for a milliner in the paper I answered it. I was asked to come to the home of the Jewish people who had placed the advert and it was there that I met my future husband [Hyman](/profiles/Hyman-Judah-Hoffman). He was boarding there, a Western Australian studying at Melbourne University. We started to go out together and eventually I came with him to Perth in 1942 where we were married.

My social life in Melbourne was so different to what it had been in Vienna. There I had friends and we used to go on Sunday excursions or we would go walking in the Vienna woods. I used to go to summer holiday camps in the mountains or the lakeside. I loved walking in the mountains. I was a good mountain walker. My love was to get on to the top of a mountain, where there were huts where you could sleep. On occasion I remember taking a one-week walking tour from one mountain range to another, with my brother and his wife.

I had belonged to a youth group, the Social Democratic Youth Group, not a Zionist Youth Group. I had many close friends, mostly Jewish. We had subscription tickets for the Burg Theatre where we saw high classic plays and dramas. We went to the opera where we queued up for hours then rushed upstairs with our cheap tickets and stood in the gods for the entire performance. Every Sunday morning I went to the Art Gallery, the Kunsthistorische Museum, with a close friend. We would look at only one or two big halls at a single visit, there was so much to see. I knew anti-semitism was there. It was in the air, but I didn't feel it personally. It came as a shock.

So Melbourne was quite different. I became friendly with some Jewish girls from Perth who were living and working in Melbourne. They were my first Jewish friends and were very helpful. Mostly no one seemed to bother with strange people. Only the other German refugees were kind and helpful.

After the war was declared in 1939 I became an enemy alien even though I had come to Australia as a refugee from the Nazis. I was not allowed to travel more than ten miles from where I lived and I had to report to the police station at Prahran every week. I was not allowed to have a radio and I had to carry an identity card with my photo and have fingerprints taken. This status was a source of difficulty when I wanted to come to Perth to get married.

Of course I was very restricted as an enemy alien. When I wanted to come to Perth my future father-in-law [Moshe](/profiles/Moshe-%D7%9E%D7%A9%D7%94-Hoffman-Hochman) had to guarantee my bona fides in order to get permission from the military authorities for me to leave Melbourne and travel by train to Perth. He gave assurances that I would report to the police station immediately upon my arrival in Perth. However, after one visit I was not required to reappear regularly. Then I was married and automatically became an Australian citizen. It was different to be married to an Australian.

I worked in Perth before my marriage. I had a job in an insurance company as a re-insurance clerk, my capability with maths once again helping considerably. The company was the Bankers and Traders Insurance Company and I worked in their office in St Georges Terrace.

My husband joined the army and was posted away in 1942–1943. His family and relatives were very helpful in settling me into a new town. I found I could make friends easily and they are still my friends today. Perth was like a village to me in those days. You would find it difficult to get a cup of tea away from home. There were no coffee lounges or restaurants. It was certainly different from Melbourne which itself was a far cry from Vienna.

I can honestly say that I have never thought back to Vienna since I've lived here. My life is here. I settled well and have become Australian. I believe I am a 'true Aussie'.

I have travelled to Europe several times since the war. I have visited Dachau and felt sick and appalled at the sight of the crematoria and the gas ovens and the written Dusche on the walls outside, which means showers, and I know they were the gas chambers. Then I thought of my aunts and uncles and cousins who died there.

