## Introduction

<div dir="rtl">
"על שלשה דברים העולם עומד:  
על התורה,  
ועל העבודה,  
ועל גמילות חסדים"

**פרקי אבות**
</div>

"Upon three things the world is based:  
upon the Torah,  
upon the Temple service,   
and upon the practice of charity".

**Ethics of the Fathers**

My grandfather Moishe was never one to keep documents. Now and then he would tell of an episode in his life. Though he was convivial, to no one did he give a chronological account of his early life. We all loved his company, however, I was too young to realize that I would one day be sorry not to have cross examined him. I have thus included all the stories that he told me, and everything else that I reliably know of him.

Lately, a large number of national, state and local newspapers have been photographed and are available on-line in TROVE. Similarly the **Australian National Archives** are being microfilmed and both these have have provided valuable data.

His own personal documents have recently come to our attention, but they are very limited. However, I draw on these sources and on family. This is above all the story of a Jewish family living in Russia in a time of momentous changes, of tumult, repression and violence. Had I not described these events, the histories of Moishe and of our grandmother Tubb’l, would be next to meaningless.

This biography takes us up to their landfall in Australia. They went ashore on 25th April 1910. The fifth anniversary of their arrival would be known as Anzac Day.

This history takes us up to the year 1910.

Whatever else anyone can tell me, and photos and documents, will be most welcome!

## Chapters

1. [[01-in_russia|Moshe Hoffman In Russia]]
2. [[02-savran_progrom|1917 Savran Pogrom]]
3. [[03-trans_siberian|Trans-Siberian Railway]]
4. [[04-savran-to-fremantle|Savran to Fremantle]]
5. [[05-scharnhost_passangers|Scharnhorst Passengers]]
6. [[06-beile-goichman|Beile Goichman]]
7. [[07-tobl_zitserman|Tobl Zitserman]]
8. [[08-moshe_tobl_in_perth|Moshe and Tobl in Perth]]

_**Peter Hoffman, Rehovot, revised January 2023**_