## Hyam Yudl Hochman Introduction

Hyam was born in Savran in Podolia, Russia, the second son in a large family. On 15.8.1891 he married [Sarah Bersharda](/profiles/Sara-Hochman-Bershada) in Balta. Hyam was a member of an early Zionist movement known as Hovevei Zion. חובבי ציון While still in Russia, probably from an agent in Odessa, he purchased land in Doran (later known as Rehovot) from Yehoshua Hankin. He soon left Russia and made his home there. Their children, [Rivka](/profiles/Rivka-Bar-Cohen-Hoffman) 1892, [Shulamis](/profiles/Shulamit-Hochman) abt. 1894, and [Wolfe](/profiles/Wolfe-Hochman) abt.1896, were among the first of the colony. Hyam worked at the Mikve Yisrael מקווה ישראל agricultural school near Jaffa. The school was founded by the Alliance Israelite movement. For many years it had an active winery. Conditions in Palestine were difficult, and Hyam and [Sarah](/profiles/Sara-Hochman-Bershada), just as other families they knew in the area, decided to try their luck in Western Australia.

## Chapters

1. [[01-background|Historic Background]]
2. [[02-arrival_of_hyam_yudl|Arrival of Hyam Yudl Hochman (1901-1904)]]
3. [[03-arrival_of_berl|Arrival of Berl Hochman (1904-1907)]]
4. [[04-business_development|Business Development (1904-1907)]]
5. [[05-arrival_of_israel|Arrival of Israel Hochman (1907-1909)]]
6. [[06-partnerships_and_licenses|Partnerships and Licenses (1909)]]
7. [[07-arrival_of_moishe_wolfe|Arrival of Moishe & Wolfe Hochman (1910)]]
8. [[08-final_years|Final Years and Challenges (1911-1914)]]
9. [[09-transition|Transition (1914-1916)]]
10. [[10-family_establishment|Family Establishment (1916-1920)]]



